@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction
@top Introduction
@end ifnottex

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

This document describes the use of @iii{} tool for the analysis of an 
executable file. This tutorial does not cover all features of the tool but
presents most usual ones. @iii{} is essentially a simulator built on top of
@Insight{} framework (@bibcite{Insight}). Simulation can be an efficient tool 
for the debugging and understanding of program behaviors. 

@Insight{} framework permits to interpret program semantics over different 
domains. Even if its design is quite independent of the interpretation 
domain, @iii{} allows only two kinds of values: concrete and formula. In the
first case, the tool behaves roughly like a classical debugger. However, @iii{} 
is limited to the interpretation of the internal model of the program
i.e., its microcode. Many low-level aspects are not captured by the
framework: system calls, dynamic loading, multi-threading and so on. 
To be short, microcode model has threes kind of instructions:
@enumerate
@item @strong{Assignments} @var{lv} := @emph{E} where @var{lv} is a 
@emph{l-value} i.e., a register or a memory cell and @emph{E} is a bitvector 
expression.
@item @strong{Guarded static jumps} change the program counter to an address known @emph{a priori}, if the guard is satisfied.
@item @strong{Dynamic jumps} that change the program counter to an address 
computed on-the-fly by the program.
@end enumerate

By default, values are interpreted as formulas. In this case @iii{} behaves 
like a symbolic simulator (@bibcite{JK76}). Since the appearance of efficient
solvers, symbolic simulation has became an effective tool for the analysis
of programs. For details on symbolic simulation we refer the reader to the
literature. Here we restrain us to main ideas.

Regardless of the interpretation domain, the simulator maintains a state
of the simulation that models the content of the memory and registers, and 
the value of the program counter. In the context of symbolic simulation this
state associates to each byte of the memory and to each register a formula;
the program counter is a concrete address that points somewhere into the loaded
memory. In addition to these three components, a @emph{symbolic state} possesses
a fourth one: a formula called the @emph{path-condition} which is initially set
to @t{true}.

Each time an instruction of the microcode is interpreted, it changes the 
symbolic state as follows:
@itemize
@item If the instruction is an assignment @var{lv} = @emph{E} where @var{lv}
is an @emph{l-value} (i.e., either a register or a memory cell) and @emph{E}
is an expression then, each register and memory cell used by @emph{E} are
replaced by their assigned value in the current state. If some register or 
memory cell, says @var{x}, used by @emph{E} is not assigned then a fresh 
variable @var{fv} is generated and assigned to @var{x} in the new state and 
@var{x} is replaced by @var{fv} in @emph{E}. Finally the formula obtained 
from @emph{E} when all substitutions have been done is assigned to @var{lv}
in the new state.

@item If the instruction is a static jump to the address @emph{tgt} and if
the jump is guarded by some condition @emph{G}, then the simulator check first
if @emph{G} is satisfiable in the current state. To this aim, as for 
assignments,
any occurrence of a register or memory cell is replaced by its current value
or a fresh variable in @emph{G}; this gives a formula @emph{G'}. The solver is 
then used to verify the satiafiability of (@emph{G'} @t{and} @emph{pc}) where
@emph{pc} is the current path-condition. If the
formula is satisfiable then the new path-condition becomes (@emph{G'} @t{and} 
@emph{pc}) and program counter is updated; else the simulator tries the next 
microcode instruction at the same
address or stops.

@item If the instruction is a dynamic jump to an address obtained from an
expression @emph{E}, then, as for others instructions, registers and memory
cells are replaced by their value in @emph{E}. Then, the solver is used to 
compute a valid value @t{addr} for @emph{E} under the constraint of the
path condition. If this is the case, the constraint (@emph{E} = @t{addr})
is added to the new path condition and the program counter is set to @t{addr}.

@end itemize
